CHAPTER10 


Light – Reflection and 
Refraction 

W
W
e see a variety of objects in the world around us. However, we are 
unable to see anything in a dark room. On lighting up the room, 
things become visible. What makes things visible? During the day, the 
sunlight helps us to see objects. An object reflects light that falls on it. 
This reflected light, when received by our eyes, enables us to see things. 
We are able to see through a transparent medium as light is transmitted 
through it. There are a number of common wonderful phenomena 
associated with light such as image formation by mirrors, the twinkling 
of stars, the beautiful colours of a rainbow, bending of light by a medium 
and so on. A study of the properties of light helps us to explore them. 

By observing the common optical phenomena around us, we may 
conclude that light seems to travel in straight lines. The fact that a small 
source of light casts a sharp shadow of an opaque object points to this 
straight-line path of light, usually indicated as a ray of light. 

More to Know!
If an opaque object on the path of light becomes very small, light has a tendency to 
bend around it and not walk in a straight line – an effect known as the diffraction of 
light. Then the straight-line treatment of optics using rays fails. To explain phenomena 
such as diffraction, light is thought of as a wave, the details of which you will study 
in higher classes. Again, at the beginning of the 20th century, it became known that 
the wave theory of light often becomes inadequate for treatment of the interaction of 
light with matter, and light often behaves somewhat like a stream of particles. This 
confusion about the true nature of light continued for some years till a modern 
quantum theory of light emerged in which light is neither a ‘wave’ nor a ‘particle’ – 
the new theory reconciles the particle properties of light with the wave nature. 
In this Chapter, we shall study the phenomena of reflection and 
refraction of light using the straight-line propagation of light. These basic 
concepts will help us in the study of some of the optical phenomena in 
nature. We shall try to understand in this Chapter the reflection of light 
by spherical mirrors and refraction of light and their application in real 
life situations. 

10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT 
10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT 
A highly polished surface, such as a mirror, reflects most of the light 
falling on it. You are already familiar with the laws of reflection of light. 


Let us recall these laws – 

(i) The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, and 
(ii) The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence 
and the reflected ray, all lie in the same plane. 
These laws of reflection are applicable to all types of reflecting surfaces 
including spherical surfaces. You are familiar with the formation of image 
by a plane mirror. What are the properties of the image? Image formed 
by a plane mirror is always virtual and erect. The size of the image is 
equal to that of the object. The image formed is as far behind the mirror 
as the object is in front of it. Further, the image is laterally inverted. 
How would the images be when the reflecting surfaces are curved? Let 
us explore. 

Activity 10.1 
Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1 

• 
Take a large shining spoon. Try to view your face in its curved 
surface. 
• 
Do you get the image? Is it smaller or larger? 
• 
Move the spoon slowly away from your face. Observe the image. 
How does it change? 
• 
Reverse the spoon and repeat the Activity. How does the image 
look like now? 
• 
Compare the characteristics of the image on the two surfaces. 
The curved surface of a shining spoon could be considered as a curved 
mirror. The most commonly used type of curved mirror is the spherical 
mirror. The reflecting surface of such mirrors can be considered to form 
a part of the surface of a sphere. Such mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces 
are spherical, are called spherical mirrors. We shall now study about 
spherical mirrors in some detail. 

10.2 SPHERIC
10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS 
AL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORS 
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards or 
outwards. A spherical mirror, whose reflecting surface is curved inwards, 
that is, faces towards the centre of the sphere, is called a concave mirror. 
A spherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called 
a convex mirror. The schematic representation of these mirrors is shown 
in Fig. 10.1. You may note in these diagrams that the back 
of the mirror is shaded. 

You may now understand that the surface of the spoon 
curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror 
and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be 
approximated to a convex mirror. 

Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need to 
recognise and understand the meaning of a few terms. These 


terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical (a) Concave mirror (b) Convex mirror 
mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical 

Figure 10.1 

mirror is a point called the pole. It lies on the surface of the Schematic representation of spherical 
mirror. The pole is usually represented by the letter P. mirrors; the shaded side is non-reflecting. 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

161 

(a) 


Figure 10.2 

(a) Concave mirror 
(b) Convex mirror 
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part of a sphere. 
This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of 
the spherical mirror. It is represented by the letter C. Please note that the 
centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror. It lies outside its reflecting 
surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it. 
However, it lies behind the mirror in case of a convex mirror. You may 
note this in Fig.10.2 (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the 
reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius 
of curvature of the mirror. It is represented by the letter R. You may note 
that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight 
line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of a spherical 
mirror. This line is called the principal axis. Remember that principal 
axis is normal to the mirror at its pole. Let us understand an important 
term related to mirrors, through an Activity. 

Activity 10.2 
Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2 

CAUTION: Do not look at the Sun directly or even into a mirror 
reflecting sunlight. It may damage your eyes. 

• 
Hold a concave mirror in your hand and direct its reflecting surface 
towards the Sun. 
• 
Direct the light reflected by the mirror on to a sheet of paper held 
close to the mirror. 
• 
Move the sheet of paper back and forth gradually until you find 
on the paper sheet a bright, sharp spot of light. 
• 
Hold the mirror and the paper in the same position for a few 
minutes. What do you observe? Why? 
The paper at first begins to burn producing smoke. Eventually it 
may even catch fire. Why does it burn? The light from the Sun is converged 
at a point, as a sharp, bright spot by the mirror. In fact, this spot of light 

is the image of the Sun on the sheet of paper. This point is 

(b) 


the focus of the concave mirror. The heat produced due to 
the concentration of sunlight ignites the paper. The distance 
of this image from the position of the mirror gives the 
approximate value of focal length of the mirror. 

Let us try to understand this observation with the help 
of a ray diagram. 

Observe Fig.10.2 (a) closely. A number of rays parallel 
to the principal axis are falling on a concave mirror. Observe 
the reflected rays. They are all meeting/intersecting at a 
point on the principal axis of the mirror. This point is called 
the principal focus of the concave mirror. Similarly, observe 
Fig. 10.2 (b). How are the rays parallel to the principal axis, 
reflected by a convex mirror? The reflected rays appear to 
come from a point on the principal axis. This point is called 
the principal focus of the convex mirror. The principal focus 
is represented by the letter F. The distance between the 
pole and the principal focus of a spherical mirror is called 
the focal length. It is represented by the letter f. 


162 
Science 


The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is by and large spherical. 
The surface, then, has a circular outline. The diameter of the reflecting 
surface of spherical mirror is called its aperture. In Fig.10.2, distance 
MN represents the aperture. We shall consider in our discussion only 
such spherical mirrors whose aperture is much smaller than its radius 
of curvature. 

Is there a relationship between the radius of curvature R, and focal 
length f, of a spherical mirror? For spherical mirrors of small apertures, 
the radius of curvature is found to be equal to twice the focal length. We 
put this as R = 2f . This implies that the principal focus of a spherical 
mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature. 

10.2.1 Image Formation by Spherical Mirrors 
You have studied about the image formation by plane mirrors. You also 
know the nature, position and relative size of the images formed by them. 
How about the images formed by spherical mirrors? How can we locate 
the image formed by a concave mirror for different positions of the object? 
Are the images real or virtual? Are they enlarged, diminished or have 
the same size? We shall explore this with an Activity. 

Activity 10.3 
Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3 

You have already learnt a way of determining the focal length of a 
concave mirror. In Activity 10.2, you have seen that the sharp bright 
spot of light you got on the paper is, in fact, the image of the Sun. It 
was a tiny, real, inverted image. You got the approximate focal length 
of the concave mirror by measuring the distance of the image from 
the mirror. 

• 
Take a concave mirror. Find out its approximate focal length in 
the way described above. Note down the value of focal length. (You 
can also find it out by obtaining image of a distant object on a 
sheet of paper.) 
• 
Mark a line on a Table with a chalk. Place the concave mirror on 
a stand. Place the stand over the line such that its pole lies over 
the line. 
• 
Draw with a chalk two more lines parallel to the previous line 
such that the distance between any two successive lines is equal 
to the focal length of the mirror. These lines will now correspond 
to the positions of the points P, F and C, respectively. Remember – 
For a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies 
mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature C. 
• 
Keep a bright object, say a burning candle, at a position far beyond 
C. Place a paper screen and move it in front of the mirror till you 
obtain a sharp bright image of the candle flame on it. 
• 
Observe the image carefully. Note down its nature, position and 
relative size with respect to the object size. 
• 
Repeat the activity by placing the candle – (a) just beyond C, 
(b) at C, (c) between F and C, (d) at F, and (e) between P and F. 
• 
In one of the cases, you may not get the image on the screen. 
Identify the position of the object in such a case. Then, look for its 
virtual image in the mirror itself. 
• 
Note down and tabulate your observations. 
Light – Reflection and Refraction 

163 

You will see in the above Activity that the nature, position and size of 
the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the 
object in relation to points P, F and C. The image formed is real for some 
positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other 
position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size, 
depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations 
is given for your reference in Table 10.1. 

Table 10.1 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object 

Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the 
object image image image 
At infinity At the focus F Highly diminished, 
point-sized 
Real and inverted 
Beyond C Between F and C Diminished Real and inverted 
At C At C Same size Real and inverted 
Between C and F Beyond C Enlarged Real and inverted 
At F At infinity Highly enlarged Real and inverted 
Between P and F Behind the mirror Enlarged Virtual and erect 
10.2.2 Representation of Images Formed by Spherical 
Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams 
We can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by 
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed 
in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object 
acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each 
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the 
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a 
point could be considered. However, it is more convenient to consider 
only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are 
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the 
mirror. 
The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image 
of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for 
locating the image. 


(i) A ray parallel to the 
principal axis, after 
reflection, will pass through 
the principal focus in case of 
a concave mirror or appear 
to diverge from the principal 
focus in case of a convex 
mirror. This is illustrated in 
(a) (b) 
Fig.10.3 (a) and (b).

Figure 10.3 

164 
Science 


(ii) A ray passing through the 
principal focus of a concave 
mirror or a ray which is 
directed towards the 
principal focus of a convex 
mirror, after reflection, will 
emerge parallel to the 
principal axis. This is 
illustrated in Fig.10.4 (a) 
(a) (b) 
and (b). 

Figure 10.4

(iii) A ray passing through the 
centre of curvature of a 
concave mirror or directed 
in the direction of the centre 
of curvature of a convex 
mirror, after reflection, is 
reflected back along the 
same path. This is 


illustrated in Fig.10.5 (a) 
and (b). The light rays come 
back along the same path 
because the incident rays 
fall on the mirror along the 
normal to the reflecting 
surface. 

(iv) A ray incident obliquely to 
the principal axis, towards 
(a) (b) 
Figure 10.5 

a point P (pole of the mirror), 
on the concave mirror 
[Fig. 10.6 (a)] or a convex 
mirror [Fig. 10.6 (b)], is 
reflected obliquely. The 
incident and reflected rays 
follow the laws of reflection 

(a) (b) 
at the point of incidence 
(point P), making equal Figure 10.6 
angles with the principal axis. 

Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed. 
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that 
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence. 

(a) Image formation by Concave Mirror 
Figure 10.7 illustrates the ray diagrams for the formation of image 
by a concave mirror for various positions of the object. 
Light – Reflection and Refraction 

165 

Figure 10.7 Ray diagrams for the image formation by a concave mirror 

Activity 10.4 
Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4 

• 
Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown in 
Table 10.1. 
• 
You may take any two of the rays mentioned in the previous section 
for locating the image. 
• 
Compare your diagram with those given in Fig. 10.7. 
• 
Describe the nature, position and relative size of the image formed 
in each case. 
• 
Tabulate the results in a convenient format. 
Uses of concave mirrors 

Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and 
vehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are 
often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The 
dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients. 
Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce 
heat in solar furnaces. 

(b) Image formation by a Convex Mirror 
We studied the image formation by a concave mirror. Now we shall 
study the formation of image by a convex mirror. 
166 
Science 


Activity 10.5 
Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5 

• 
Take a convex mirror. Hold it in one hand. 
• 
Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand. 
• 
Observe the image of the pencil in the mirror. Is the image erect or 
inverted? Is it diminished or enlarged? 
• 
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image 
become smaller or larger? 
• 
Repeat this Activity carefully. State whether the image will move 
closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is moved 
away from the mirror? 
We consider two positions of the object for studying the image formed 
by a convex mirror. First is when the object is at infinity and the second 
position is when the object is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray 
diagrams for the formation of image by a convex mirror for these two 
positions of the object are shown in Fig.10.8 (a) and (b), respectively. 
The results are summarised in Table 10.2. 


Figure 10.8 Formation of image by a convex mirror 

Table 10.2 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex mirror 

Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the 
object image image image 
At infinity 

At the focus F, 

Highly diminished, 

Virtual and erect 
behind the mirror 

point-sized 

Between infinity 

Between P and F, 

Diminished 

Virtual and erect 
and the pole P of 

behind the mirror 
the mirror 

You have so far studied the image formation by a plane mirror, a 
concave mirror and a convex mirror. Which of these mirrors will give the 
full image of a large object? Let us explore through an Activity. 

Activity 10.6 
Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6 

• 
Observe the image of a distant object, say a distant tree, in a 
plane mirror. 
• 
Could you see a full-length image? 
Light – Reflection and Refraction 

167 

• 
Try with plane mirrors of different sizes. Did you see the entire 
object in the image? 
• 
Repeat this Activity with a concave mirror. Did the mirror show 
full length image of the object? 
• 
Now try using a convex mirror. Did you succeed? Explain your 
observations with reason. 
You can see a full-length image of a tall building/tree in a small 
convex mirror. One such mirror is fitted in a wall of Agra Fort. If you visit 
the Agra Fort, try to observe the full-length image of a distant, tall 
building/tomb in the wall mirror. To view the tomb distinctly, you should 
stand suitably at the terrace adjoining the wall. 

Uses of convex mirrors 

Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in 
vehicles. These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle, enabling the 
driver to see traffic behind him/her to facilitate safe driving. Convex 
mirrors are preferred because they always give an erect, though 
diminished, image. Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved 
outwards. Thus, convex mirrors enable the driver to view much larger 
area than would be possible with a plane mirror. 

QUESTIONS 
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Define the principal focus of a concave mirror. 
The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is 20 cm. What is its focal 
length? 
Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of an object. 
Why do we prefer a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles? ? 

10.2.3 Sign Convention for Reflection by Spherical Mirrors 
While dealing with the reflection of light by spherical mirrors, we shall 
follow a set of sign conventions called the New Cartesian Sign 
Convention. In this convention, the pole (P) of the mirror is taken as the 
origin. The principal axis of the mirror is taken as the x-axis (X’X) of the 
coordinate system. The conventions are as follows – 

(i) The object is always placed to the left of the mirror. This implies 
that the light from the object falls on the mirror from the left-hand 
side. 
(ii) All distances parallel to the principal axis are measured from the 
pole of the mirror. 
(iii) All the distances measured to the right of the origin (along 
+ x-axis) are taken as positive while those measured to the left of 
the origin (along – x-axis) are taken as negative. 
(iv) Distances measured perpendicular to and above the principal axis 
(along + y-axis) are taken as positive. 
(v) Distances measured perpendicular to and below the principal axis 
(along –y-axis) are taken as negative. 
168 
Science 


The New Cartesian Sign Convention described above is illustrated in 
Fig.10.9 for your reference. These sign conventions are applied to obtain 
the mirror formula and solve related numerical problems. 

10.2.4 Mirror Formula and Magnification 
In a spherical mirror, the distance of the 
object from its pole is called the object 
distance (u). The distance of the image from 
the pole of the mirror is called the image 
distance (v). You already know that the 
distance of the principal focus from the pole 
is called the focal length (f). There is a 
relationship between these three quantities 
given by the mirror formula which is 
expressed as 


11 1+= (10.1)

vu f 

This formula is valid in all situations for all 
spherical mirrors for all positions of the 


Figure 10.9

object. You must use the New Cartesian Sign 

The New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical mirrors

Convention while substituting numerical 
values for u, v, f, and R in the mirror formula 
for solving problems. 

Magnification 

Magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives the relative extent to 
which the image of an object is magnified with respect to the object size. 
It is expressed as the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the 
object. It is usually represented by the letter m. 

If h is the height of the object and h'is the height of the image, then 
the magnification m produced by a spherical mirror is given by 

Height of the image ( h ') 
m = Height of the object ( ) 

h 

h ' 

m = (10.2)

h 

The magnification m is also related to the object distance (u) and 
image distance (v). It can be expressed as: 

h ’ v 

Magnification (m) = =- (10.3)

hu 

You may note that the height of the object is taken to be positive as 
the object is usually placed above the principal axis. The height of the 
image should be taken as positive for virtual images. However, it is to be 
taken as negative for real images. A negative sign in the value of the 
magnification indicates that the image is real. A positive sign in the value 
of the magnification indicates that the image is virtual. 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

169 

Example 10.1 

A convex mirror used for rear-view on an automobile has a radius of 
curvature of 3.00 m. If a bus is located at 5.00 m from this mirror, 
find the position, nature and size of the image. 

Solution 

Radius of curvature, R = + 3.00 m; 
Object-distance, u = – 5.00 m; 
Image-distance, v =? 
Height of the image, h'=? 

3.00 m 
Focal length, f = R/2 = + = + 1.50 m

2 

11 1 

+=
Since 

vu f 

1111 1 11 

=-

or, = + – = 

vfu 1.50(5.00)1.50 + 
5.00 

5.00 1.50 

= 

7.50 

+750 

. 

v = = + 1.15 m

650 

.

The image is 1.15 m at the back of the mirror. 

h ’ v 1.15 m 

Magnification, m = =- = – 

hu 5.00 m

 = + 0.23 
The image is virtual, erect and smaller in size by a factor of 0.23. 

Example 10.2 

An object, 4.0 cm in size, is placed at 25.0 cm in front of a concave 
mirror of focal length 15.0 cm. At what distance from the mirror 
should a screen be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Find 
the nature and the size of the image. 

Solution 

Object-size, h = + 4.0 cm; 
Object-distance, u = – 25.0 cm; 
Focal length, f = –15.0 cm; 
Image-distance, v = ? 
Image-size, h'= ? 
From Eq. (10.1): 

11 1 

+= 
vu f 

1111 1 11 

=-= -=-+

or, 

fu -15 0 -250 . 250 

v . . 150 . 
170 
Science 


1 50 + . -20

- .30 . 

or, == or, v= – 37.5 cm

750. 750

v .
The screen should be placed at 37.5 cm from the mirror. The image 
is real. 

h’ v 

Also, magnification, m= =- 

hu 
vh -375. cm) (+40

( . cm)

-

or, h'= – 
u 
= .

(-25 0 cm) 

Height of the image, h'= – 6.0 cm 
The image is inverted and enlarged. 

QUESTIONS 
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS
1. 
2. 
Find the focal length of a convex mirror whose radius of curvature is 
32 cm. 
A concave mirror produces three times magnified (enlarged) real image 
of an object placed at 10 cm in front of it. Where is the image located? ? 

10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT 
10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT 
Light seems to travel along straight-line paths in a transparent medium. 
What happens when light enters from one transparent medium to 
another? Does it still move along a straight-line path or change its 
direction? We shall recall some of our day-to-day experiences. 

You might have observed that the bottom of a tank or a pond 
containing water appears to be raised. Similarly, when a thick glass slab 
is placed over some printed matter, the letters appear raised when viewed 
through the glass slab. Why does it happen? Have you seen a pencil 
partly immersed in water in a glass tumbler? It appears to be displaced 
at the interface of air and water. You might have observed that a lemon 
kept in water in a glass tumbler appears to be bigger than its actual 
size, when viewed from the sides. How can you account for such 
experiences? 

Let us consider the case of the apparent displacement of a pencil, 
partly immersed in water. The light reaching you from the portion of the 
pencil inside water seems to come from a different direction, compared 
to the part above water. This makes the pencil appear to be displaced at 
the interface. For similar reasons, the letters appear to be raised, when 
seen through a glass slab placed over it. 

Does a pencil appear to be displaced to the same extent, if instead of 
water, we use liquids like kerosene or turpentine? Will the letters appear 
to rise to the same height if we replace a glass slab with a transparent 
plastic slab? You will find that the extent of the effect is different for 
different pair of media. These observations indicate that light does not 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

171 

travel in the same direction in all media. It appears that when travelling 
obliquely from one medium to another, the direction of propagation of 
light in the second medium changes. This phenomenon is known as 
refraction of light. Let us understand this phenomenon further by doing 
a few activities. 

Activity 10.7 
Activity 10.7Activity 10.7Activity 10.7Activity 10.7Activity 10.7 

• 
Place a coin at the bottom of a bucket filled with water. 
• 
With your eye to a side above water, try to pick up the coin in one 
go. Did you succeed in picking up the coin? 
• 
Repeat the Activity. Why did you not succeed in doing it in one go? 
• 
Ask your friends to do this. Compare your experience with theirs. 
Activity 10.8 
Activity 10.8Activity 10.8Activity 10.8Activity 10.8Activity 10.8 

• 
Place a large shallow bowl on a Table and put a coin in it. 
• 
Move away slowly from the bowl. Stop when the coin just 
disappears from your sight. 
• 
Ask a friend to pour water gently into the bowl without disturbing 
the coin. 
• 
Keep looking for the coin from your position. Does the coin becomes 
visible again from your position? How could this happen? 
The coin becomes visible again on pouring water into the bowl. The 
coin appears slightly raised above its actual position due to refraction of 
light. 

Activity 10.9 
Activity 10.9Activity 10.9Activity 10.9Activity 10.9Activity 10.9 

• 
Draw a thick straight line in ink, over a sheet of white paper placed 
on a Table. 
• 
Place a glass slab over the line in such a way that one of its edges 
makes an angle with the line. 
• 
Look at the portion of the line under the slab from the sides. What 
do you observe? Does the line under the glass slab appear to be 
bent at the edges? 
• 
Next, place the glass slab such that it is normal to the line. What 
do you observe now? Does the part of the line under the glass slab 
appear bent? 
• 
Look at the line from the top of the glass slab. Does the part of the 
line, beneath the slab, appear to be raised? Why does this happen? 
10.3.1 Refraction through a Rectangular Glass Slab 
To understand the phenomenon of refraction of light through a glass 
slab, let us do an Activity. 

172 
Science 


Activity 10.10 
Activity 10.10Activity 10.10Activity 10.10Activity 10.10Activity 10.10 

• 
Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins. 
• 
Place a rectangular glass slab over the sheet in the middle. 
• 
Draw the outline of the slab with a pencil. Let us name the outline 
as ABCD. 
• 
Take four identical pins. 
• 
Fix two pins, say E and F, vertically such that the line joining the 
pins is inclined to the edge AB. 
• 
Look for the images of the pins E and F through the opposite edge. 
Fix two other pins, say G and H, such that these pins and the 
images of E and F lie on a straight line. 
• 
Remove the pins and the slab. 
• 
Join the positions of tip of the pins E and F and produce the line 
up to AB. Let EF meet AB at O. Similarly, join the positions of tip 
of the pins G and H and produce it up to the edge CD. Let HG 
meet CD at O'. 
• 
Join O and O'. Also produce EF up to P, as shown by a dotted line 
in Fig. 10.10. 
In this Activity, you will note, the light ray has changed its direction 
at points O and O'. Note that both the points O and O' lie on surfaces 
separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN’ to AB at O 
and another perpendicular MM’ to CD at O'. The light ray at point O has 
entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to 
glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards 
the normal. At O', the light ray has entered 
from glass to air, that is, from a denser 
medium to a rarer medium. The light here 
has bent away from the normal. Compare the 
angle of incidence with the angle of refraction 
at both refracting surfaces AB and CD. 

In Fig. 10.10, EO is the incident ray, OO' 
is the refracted ray and O' H is the emergent 
ray. You may observe that the emergent ray 
is parallel to the direction of the incident ray. 
Why does it happen so? The extent of bending 
of the ray of light at the opposite parallel faces 
AB (air-glass interface) and CD (glass-air 
interface) of the rectangular glass slab is 
equal and opposite. This is why the ray 
emerges parallel to the incident ray. However, 
the light ray is shifted sideward slightly. What 
happens when a light ray is incident 
normally to the interface of two media? Try 
and find out. 


Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to 
change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to 
another. Experiments show that refraction of light occurs according to 
certain laws. 

Figure 10.10 

Refraction of light through a rectangular glass slab 


Light – Reflection and Refraction 

173 

The following are the laws of refraction of light.

symbol n21
Figure 10.11 

(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the 
interface of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all 
lie in the same plane. 
(ii) The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of 
refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for 
the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell’s law of 
refraction. 
If i is the angle of incidence and r is the angle of refraction, then, 

sini 

= constant (10.4)

sinr 

This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium 
with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail. 

10.3.2 The Refractive Index 
You have already studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely from 
one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the 
second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place 
in a given pair of media is expressed in terms of the refractive index, the 
“constant” appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(10.4). 

The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity, 
the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns out 
that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light travels 
the fastest in vacuum with the highest speed of 3×108 m s–1. In air, the 
speed of light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It 
reduces considerably in glass or water. The value of the refractive index 
for a given pair of media depends upon the speed of light in the two 
media, as given below. 

Consider a ray of light travelling from medium 1 into medium 2, as 
shown in Fig.10.11. Let v1 be the speed of light in medium 1 and v2 be 
the speed of light in medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with 
respect to medium 1 is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium 
1 and the speed of light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the 

. This can be expressed in an equation form as 

Speed of light in medium 1 v1

n= = (10.5)

21 Speed of light in medium 2 v2 

By the same argument, the refractive index of medium 
1 with respect to medium 2 is represented as n12.It is given 
by 

Speed of light in medium 2 v2

n12= = (10.6)

Speed of light in medium 1 v1 

If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2 
is considered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive 
index of the medium. It is simply represented as n2. If c is the speed of 

174 
Science 


light in air and v is the speed of light in the medium, then, the refractive 
index of the medium n m is given by 

Speed of light in air c 

n m = = (10.7)

Speed of light in the medium v 

The absolute refractive index of a medium is simply called its refractive 
index. The refractive index of several media is given in Table 10.3. From 
the Table you can know that the refractive index of water, nw = 1.33. 
This means that the ratio of the speed of light in air and the speed of 
light in water is equal to 1.33. Similarly, the refractive index of crown 
glass, ng =1.52. Such data are helpful in many places. However, you 
need not memorise the data. 

Table 10.3 Absolute refractive index of some material media 

Material Refractive Material Refractive 
medium index medium index 
Air 1.0003 Canada 1.53 
Balsam 
Ice 1.31 
Water 1.33 Rock salt 1.54 
Alcohol 1.36 
Kerosene 1.44 Carbon 1.63 
disulphide 
Fused 1.46 
quartz Dense 1.65 
flint glass 
Turpentine 1.47 
oil Ruby 1.71 
Benzene 1.50 
Sapphire 1.77 
Crown 1.52 
glass Diamond 2.42 

Note from Table 10.3 that an optically denser medium may not 
possess greater mass density. For example, kerosene having higher 
refractive index, is optically denser than water, although its mass density 
is less than water. 

The ability of a medium to refract light is also expressed in terms of its optical density. 
Optical density has a definite connotation. It is not the same as mass density. We have 
been using the terms ‘rarer medium’ and ‘denser medium’ in this Chapter. It actually 
means ‘optically rarer medium’ and ‘optically denser medium’, respectively. When can 
we say that a medium is optically denser than the other? In comparing two media, the 
one with the larger refractive index is optically denser medium than the other. The other 
medium of lower refractive index is optically rarer. The speed of light is higher in a rarer 
medium than a denser medium. Thus, a ray of light travelling from a rarer medium to a 
denser medium slows down and bends towards the normal. When it travels from a 
denser medium to a rarer medium, it speeds up and bends away from the normal.
More to Know! 
Light – Reflection and Refraction 

175 

QUESTIONS 
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
A ray of light travelling in air enters obliquely into water. Does the light 
ray bend towards the normal or away from the normal? Why? 
Light enters from air to glass having refractive index 1.50. What is the 
speed of light in the glass? The speed of light in vacuum is 3 × 108 m s–1 . 
Find out, from Table 10.3, the medium having highest optical density. 
Also find the medium with lowest optical density. 
You are given kerosene, turpentine and water. In which of these does 
the light travel fastest? Use the information given in Table 10.3. 
The refractive index of diamond is 2.42. What is the meaning of this 
statement? 
? 


(a) 

(b) 

10.3.3 Refraction by Spherical Lenses 
You might have seen people using spectacles for reading. The 
watchmakers use a small magnifying glass to see tiny parts. Have you 
ever touched the surface of a magnifying glass with your hand? Is it 
plane surface or curved? Is it thicker in the middle or at the edges? The 
glasses used in spectacles and that by a watchmaker are examples of 
lenses. What is a lens? How does it bend light rays? We shall discuss 
these in this section. 

A transparent material bound by two 
surfaces, of which one or both surfaces are 
spherical, forms a lens. This means that a lens is 
bound by at least one spherical surface. In such 
lenses, the other surface would be plane. A lens 
may have two spherical surfaces, bulging 
outwards. Such a lens is called a double convex 
lens. It is simply called a convex lens. It is thicker 
at the middle as compared to the edges. 
Convex lens converges light rays as shown in 
Fig. 10.12 (a). Hence convex lenses are called 
converging lenses. Similarly, a double concave 
lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces, 
curved inwards. It is thicker at the edges than at 
the middle. Such lenses diverge light rays as 
shown in Fig. 10.12 (b). Such lenses are called 
diverging lenses. A double concave lens is simply 
called a concave lens. 

A lens, either a convex lens or a concave lens,

Figure 10.12 

has two spherical surfaces. Each of these surfaces

(a) Converging action of a convex lens, (b) diverging 
action of a concave lens forms a part of a sphere. The centres of these 
spheres are called centres of curvature of the lens. 
The centre of curvature of a lens is usually represented by the letter C. 
Since there are two centres of curvature, we may represent them as C1 
and C2. An imaginary straight line passing through the two centres of 

176 
Science 


curvature of a lens is called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is 
its optical centre. It is usually represented by the letter O. A ray of light 
through the optical centre of a lens passes without suffering any deviation. 
The effective diameter of the circular outline of a spherical lens is called its 
aperture. We shall confine our discussion in this Chapter to such lenses 
whose aperture is much less than its radius of curvature. Such lenses are 
called thin lenses with small apertures. What happens when parallel rays 
of light are incident on a lens? Let us do an Activity to understand this. 

Activity 10.11 
Activity 10.11Activity 10.11Activity 10.11Activity 10.11Activity 10.11 

CAUTION: Do not look at the Sun directly or through a lens while 
doing this Activity or otherwise. You may damage your eyes if you 
do so. 

• 
Hold a convex lens in your hand. Direct it towards the Sun. 
• 
Focus the light from the Sun on a sheet of paper. Obtain a sharp 
bright image of the Sun. 
• 
Hold the paper and the lens in the same position for a while. Keep 
observing the paper. What happened? Why? Recall your experience 
in Activity 10.2. 
The paper begins to burn producing smoke. It may even catch fire 
after a while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes 
parallel rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp 
bright spot formed on the paper. In fact, the bright spot you got on the 
paper is a real image of the Sun. The concentration of the sunlight at a 
point generated heat. This caused the paper to burn. 

Now, we shall consider rays of light parallel to the principal axis of a 
lens. What happens when you pass such rays of light through a lens? 
This is illustrated for a convex lens in Fig.10.12 (a) and for a concave 
lens in Fig.10.12 (b). 

Observe Fig.10.12 (a) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the 
principal axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction 
from the lens, are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point 
on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the lens. Let us see 
now the action of a concave lens. 

Observe Fig.10.12 (b) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the 
principal axis are falling on a concave lens. These rays, after refraction 
from the lens, are appearing to diverge from a point on the principal 
axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the 
concave lens. 

If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you 
get another principal focus on the opposite side. Letter F is usually used 
to represent principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They 
are represented by F1 and F2. The distance of the principal focus from 
the optical centre of a lens is called its focal length. The letter f is used to 
represent the focal length. How can you find the focal length of a convex 
lens? Recall the Activity 10.11. In this Activity, the distance between the 
position of the lens and the position of the image of the Sun gives the 
approximate focal length of the lens. 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

177 

10.3.4 Image Formation by Lenses 
Lenses form images by refracting light. How do lenses form images? 
What is their nature? Let us study this for a convex lens first. 

Activity 10.12 
Activity 10.12Activity 10.12Activity 10.12Activity 10.12Activity 10.12 

• 
Take a convex lens. Find its approximate focal length in a way 
described in Activity 10.11. 
• 
Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long Table such 
that the distance between the successive lines is equal to the 
focal length of the lens. 
• 
Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such 
that the optical centre of the lens lies just over the line. 
• 
The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and 2F of 
the lens respectively. Mark them with appropriate letters such as 
2F1, F1, F2 and 2F2, respectively. 
• 
Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F1 to the left. Obtain a clear 
sharp image on a screen on the opposite side of the lens. 
• 
Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image. 
• 
Repeat this Activity by placing object just behind 2F1, between F1 
and 2F1 at F1, between F1 and O. Note down and tabulate your 
observations. 
The nature, position and relative size of the image formed by convex 
lens for various positions of the object is summarised in Table 10.4. 

Table 10.4 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex lens for various 
positions of the object 

Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of 
object the image the image the image 
At infinity At focus F2 Highly diminished, Real and inverted 
point-sized 
Beyond 2F1 Between F2 and 2F2 Diminished Real and inverted 
At 2F1 At 2F2 Same size Real and inverted 
Between F and 2F11 Beyond 2F2 Enlarged Real and inverted 
At focus F1 At infinity Infinitely large or Real and inverted 
highly enlarged 
Between focus F1 On the same side Enlarged Virtual and erect 
and of the lens as the 
optical centre O object 

Let us now do an Activity to study the nature, position and relative 
size of the image formed by a concave lens. 

178 
Science 


Activity 10.13 
Activity 10.13Activity 10.13Activity 10.13Activity 10.13Activity 10.13 

• 
Take a concave lens. Place it on a lens stand. 
• 
Place a burning candle on one side of the lens. 
• 
Look through the lens from the other side and observe the image. 
Try to get the image on a screen, if possible. If not, observe the 
image directly through the lens. 
• 
Note down the nature, relative size and approximate position of 
the image. 
• 
Move the candle away from the lens. Note the change in the size 
of the image. What happens to the size of the image when the 
candle is placed too far away from the lens. 
The summary of the above Activity is given in Table 10.5 below. 

Table 10.5 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens for various 
positions of the object 

Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of 
object the image the image the image 
At infinity 

At focus F1 

Highly diminished, 

Virtual and erect 
point-sized 

Between infinity and 

Between focus F1 

Diminished 

Virtual and erect 
optical centre O 

and optical centre O 
of the lens 

What conclusion can you draw from this Activity? A concave lens 
will always give a virtual, erect and diminished image, irrespective of the 
position of the object. 

10.3.5 Image Formation in Lenses Using Ray Diagrams 
We can represent image formation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray 
diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size 
of the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, alike 
of spherical mirrors, we consider any two of the following rays – 

(i) A ray of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after 
refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus 
on the other side of the lens, as shown in Fig. 10.13 (a). In case of 
a concave lens, 
the ray appears 
to diverge from 
the principal 
focus located 
on the same 
side of the lens, 
as shown in 
(a) (b)
Fig. 10.13 (b). 

Figure 10.13 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

179 

(ii) A ray of light passing 
through a principal 
focus, after refraction 
from a convex lens, will 
emerge parallel to the 
principal axis. This is 
shown in Fig. 10.14 (a). 
A ray of light appearing
(a) (b) 
to meet at the principal 

Figure 10.14 

focus of a concave lens, 
after refraction, will 
emerge parallel to the 
principal axis. This is 
shown in Fig.10.14 (b). 


(iii) A ray of light passing 
through the optical 
centre of a lens will 
emerge without any 
deviation. This is 
(a) (b) 
illustrated in Fig.10.15(a) 
Figure 10.15 and Fig.10.15 (b). 

The ray diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few 
positions of the object are shown in Fig. 10.16. The ray diagrams 
representing the image formation in a concave lens for various positions 
of the object are shown in Fig. 10.17. 


180 
Science 


Figure 10.16 The position, size and the nature of the image formed by 
a convex lens for various positions of the object 


Figure 10.17 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens 

10.3.6 Sign Convention for Spherical Lenses 
For lenses, we follow sign conventions, similar to the one used for 
spherical mirrors. We apply the rules for signs of distances, except that 
all measurements are taken from the optical centre of the lens. According 
to the convention, the focal length of a convex lens is positive and that of 
a concave lens is negative. You must take care to apply appropriate 
signs for the values of u, v, f, object height h and image height h'. 

10.3.7 Lens Formula and Magnification 
As we have a formula for spherical mirrors, we also have formula for 
spherical lenses. This formula gives the relationship between object-
distance (u), image-distance (v) and the focal length (f ). The lens formula 
is expressed as 

11 1-= (10.8)

vu f 

The lens formula given above is general and is valid in all situations 
for any spherical lens. Take proper care of the signs of different quantities, 
while putting numerical values for solving problems relating to lenses. 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

181 

Magnification 

The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical 
mirrors, is defined as the ratio of the height of the image and the height 
of the object. It is represented by the letter m. If h is the height of the 
object and h'is the height of the image given by a lens, then the 
magnification produced by the lens is given by, 

Height of the Image h' 

m = = (10.9)

Height of the object h 

Magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object-distance 
u, and the image-distance v. This relationship is given by 

Magnification (m ) = h'/h = v/u (10.10) 

Example 10.3 

A concave lens has focal length of 15 cm. At what distance should 
the object from the lens be placed so that it forms an image at 10 cm 
from the lens? Also, find the magnification produced by the lens. 

Solution 

A concave lens always forms a virtual, erect image on the same side 
of the object. 
Image-distance v = –10 cm; 
Focal length f = –15 cm; 
Object-distance u =? 

11 1

-=

Since 

vu f 

111

=-

or, 

uv f 

111 11 

= - =-+ 

u -10 (-15) 10 15 

13 1

-+2 

== 

u 30 -30 

or, u = – 30 cm 
Thus, the object-distance is 30 cm. 
Magnification m = v/u 

-10cm 1 

==+0.33 

m = -30cm 3 

The positive sign shows that the image is erect and virtual. The image 
is one-third of the size of the object. 

Example 10.4 

A 2.0 cm tall object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a 
convex lens of focal length 10 cm. The distance of the object from the 
lens is 15 cm. Find the nature, position and size of the image. Also 
find its magnification. 

Science

182 

Solution 

Height of the object h = + 2.0 cm; 
Focal length f = + 10 cm; 
object-distance u = –15 cm; 
Image-distance v =? 
Height of the image h'=? 

111

-=

Since 

vu f 

111

=+

or, 

vu f 

111 11 

= +=-+ 

v (-15)10 1510 

12 1

-+3 

== 

v 30 30 

or, v = + 30 cm 
The positive sign of v shows that the image is formed at a distance of 
30 cm on the other side of the optical centre. The image is real and 
inverted. 

h’ v 

Magnification m = = 

hu 

or, h'= h (v/u) 
Height of the image, h'= (2.0) (+30/–15) = – 4.0 cm 
Magnification m = v/u 

+30cm 

=-2

or, m = 

-15cm 

The negative signs of m and h'show that the image is inverted and 
real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image, 
4 cm tall, is formed at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the 
lens. The image is two times enlarged. 

10.3.8 Power of a Lens 
You have already learnt that the ability of a lens to converge or diverge 
light rays depends on its focal length. For example, a convex lens of 
short focal length bends the light rays through large angles, by focussing 
them closer to the optical centre. Similarly, concave lens of very short 
focal length causes higher divergence than the one with longer focal 
length. The degree of convergence or divergence of light rays achieved 
by a lens is expressed in terms of its power. The power of a lens is defined 
as the reciprocal of its focal length. It is represented by the letter P. The 
power P of a lens of focal length f is given by 

1 
P = (10.11)

f 

Light – Reflection and Refraction 

183 

The SI unit of power of a lens is ‘dioptre’. It is denoted by the letter D. 
If f is expressed in metres, then, power is expressed in dioptres. Thus, 
1 dioptre is the power of a lens whose focal length is 1 metre. 1D = 1m–1. 
You may note that the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a 
concave lens is negative. 

Opticians prescribe corrective lenses indicating their powers. Let us 
say the lens prescribed has power equal to + 2.0 D. This means the lens 
prescribed is convex. The focal length of the lens is + 0.50 m. Similarly, 
a lens of power – 2.5 D has a focal length of – 0.40 m. The lens is concave. 

Many optical instruments consist of a number of lenses. They are combined to increase 
the magnification and sharpness of the image. The net power (P) of the lenses placed 
in contact is given by the algebraic sum of the individual powers P1, P2, P3, … as 
P = P1 + P2 + P3+ … 
The use of powers, instead of focal lengths, for lenses is quite convenient for opticians. 
During eye-testing, an optician puts several different combinations of corrective lenses 
of known power, in contact, inside the testing spectacles’ frame. The optician calculates 
the power of the lens required by simple algebraic addition. For example, a combination 
of two lenses of power + 2.0 D and + 0.25 D is equivalent to a single lens of power + 2.25 D. 
The simple additive property of the powers of lenses can be used to design lens systems 
to minimise certain defects in images produced by a single lens. Such a lens system, 
consisting of several lenses, in contact, is commonly used in the design of camera 
lenses and the objectives of microscopes and telescopes. 
More to Know! 
QUESTIONS 
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS
1. 
2. 
3. 
Define 1 dioptre of power of a lens. 
A convex lens forms a real and inverted image of a needle at a distance 
of 50 cm from it. Where is the needle placed in front of the convex lens 
if the image is equal to the size of the object? Also, find the power of the 
lens. 
Find the power of a concave lens of focal length 2 m. ? 

What you have learnt 
..Light seems to travel in straight lines. 
..Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be either real or virtual, 
depending on the position of the object. 
..The reflecting surfaces, of all types, obey the laws of reflection. The refracting 
surfaces obey the laws of refraction. 
..New Cartesian Sign Conventions are followed for spherical mirrors and lenses. 
184 
Science 


..Mirror formula, 
11 1 
+= 
vu f , gives the relationship between the object-distance (u), 
image-distance (v), and focal length (f) of a spherical mirror. 
..The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius of curvature. 
..The magnification produced by a spherical mirror is the ratio of the height of the 
image to the height of the object. 
..A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends 
away from the normal. A light ray bends towards the normal when it travels obliquely 
from a rarer to a denser medium. 
..Light travels in vacuum with an enormous speed of 3×108 m s-1 . The speed of light 
is different in different media. 
..The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of the speed of light in 
vacuum to that in the medium. 
..In case of a rectangular glass slab, the refraction takes place at both air-glass 
interface and glass-air interface. The emergent ray is parallel to the direction of 
incident ray. 
..Lens formula, 
11 1 
–= 
vu f , gives the relationship between the object-distance (u), 
image-distance (v), and the focal length (f) of a spherical lens. 
..Power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length. The SI unit of power of a lens 
is dioptre. 
EXERCISES 
1. Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens? 
(a) Water (b) Glass (c) Plastic (d) Clay 
2. The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be virtual, erect and larger 
than the object. Where should be the position of the object? 
(a) Between the principal focus and the centre of curvature 
(b) At the centre of curvature 
(c) Beyond the centre of curvature 
(d) Between the pole of the mirror and its principal focus. 
3. Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens to get a real image of the 
size of the object? 
(a) At the principal focus of the lens 
(b) At twice the focal length 
(c) At infinity 
(d) Between the optical centre of the lens and its principal focus. 
4. A spherical mirror and a thin spherical lens have each a focal length of –15 cm. The 
mirror and the lens are likely to be 
(a) both concave. 
(b) both convex. 
..Mirror formula, 
11 1 
+= 
vu f , gives the relationship between the object-distance (u), 
image-distance (v), and focal length (f) of a spherical mirror. 
..The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius of curvature. 
..The magnification produced by a spherical mirror is the ratio of the height of the 
image to the height of the object. 
..A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends 
away from the normal. A light ray bends towards the normal when it travels obliquely 
from a rarer to a denser medium. 
..Light travels in vacuum with an enormous speed of 3×108 m s-1 . The speed of light 
is different in different media. 
..The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of the speed of light in 
vacuum to that in the medium. 
..In case of a rectangular glass slab, the refraction takes place at both air-glass 
interface and glass-air interface. The emergent ray is parallel to the direction of 
incident ray. 
..Lens formula, 
11 1 
–= 
vu f , gives the relationship between the object-distance (u), 
image-distance (v), and the focal length (f) of a spherical lens. 
..Power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length. The SI unit of power of a lens 
is dioptre. 
EXERCISES 
1. Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens? 
(a) Water (b) Glass (c) Plastic (d) Clay 
2. The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be virtual, erect and larger 
than the object. Where should be the position of the object? 
(a) Between the principal focus and the centre of curvature 
(b) At the centre of curvature 
(c) Beyond the centre of curvature 
(d) Between the pole of the mirror and its principal focus. 
3. Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens to get a real image of the 
size of the object? 
(a) At the principal focus of the lens 
(b) At twice the focal length 
(c) At infinity 
(d) Between the optical centre of the lens and its principal focus. 
4. A spherical mirror and a thin spherical lens have each a focal length of –15 cm. The 
mirror and the lens are likely to be 
(a) both concave. 
(b) both convex. 
Light – Reflection and Refraction 

185 

(c) the mirror is concave and the lens is convex. 
(d) the mirror is convex, but the lens is concave. 
5. No matter how far you stand from a mirror, your image appears erect. The mirror 
is likely to be 
(a) plane. 
(b) concave. 
(c) convex. 
(d) either plane or convex. 
6. Which of the following lenses would you prefer to use while reading small letters 
found in a dictionary? 
(a) A convex lens of focal length 50 cm. 
(b) A concave lens of focal length 50 cm. 
(c) A convex lens of focal length 5 cm. 
(d) A concave lens of focal length 5 cm. 
7. We wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave mirror of focal 
length 15 cm. What should be the range of distance of the object from the mirror? 
What is the nature of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object? 
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case. 
8. Name the type of mirror used in the following situations. 
(a) Headlights of a car. 
(b) Side/rear-view mirror of a vehicle. 
(c) Solar furnace. 
Support your answer with reason. 
9. One-half of a convex lens is covered with a black paper. Will this lens produce a 
complete image of the object? Verify your answer experimentally. Explain your 
observations. 
10. An object 5 cm in length is held 25 cm away from a converging lens of focal length 
10 cm. Draw the ray diagram and find the position, size and the nature of the 
image formed. 
11. A concave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm from the lens. How far 
is the object placed from the lens? Draw the ray diagram. 
12. An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror of focal length 
15 cm. Find the position and nature of the image. 
13. The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +1. What does this mean? 
14. An object 5.0 cm in length is placed at a distance of 20 cm in front of a convex 
mirror of radius of curvature 30 cm. Find the position of the image, its nature 
and size. 
15. An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave mirror of focal 
length 18 cm. At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed, so that 
a sharp focussed image can be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image. 
16. Find the focal length of a lens of power – 2.0 D. What type of lens is this? 
17. A doctor has prescribed a corrective lens of power +1.5 D. Find the focal length of 
the lens. Is the prescribed lens diverging or converging? 
(c) the mirror is concave and the lens is convex. 
(d) the mirror is convex, but the lens is concave. 
5. No matter how far you stand from a mirror, your image appears erect. The mirror 
is likely to be 
(a) plane. 
(b) concave. 
(c) convex. 
(d) either plane or convex. 
6. Which of the following lenses would you prefer to use while reading small letters 
found in a dictionary? 
(a) A convex lens of focal length 50 cm. 
(b) A concave lens of focal length 50 cm. 
(c) A convex lens of focal length 5 cm. 
(d) A concave lens of focal length 5 cm. 
7. We wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave mirror of focal 
length 15 cm. What should be the range of distance of the object from the mirror? 
What is the nature of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object? 
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case. 
8. Name the type of mirror used in the following situations. 
(a) Headlights of a car. 
(b) Side/rear-view mirror of a vehicle. 
(c) Solar furnace. 
Support your answer with reason. 
9. One-half of a convex lens is covered with a black paper. Will this lens produce a 
complete image of the object? Verify your answer experimentally. Explain your 
observations. 
10. An object 5 cm in length is held 25 cm away from a converging lens of focal length 
10 cm. Draw the ray diagram and find the position, size and the nature of the 
image formed. 
11. A concave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm from the lens. How far 
is the object placed from the lens? Draw the ray diagram. 
12. An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror of focal length 
15 cm. Find the position and nature of the image. 
13. The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +1. What does this mean? 
14. An object 5.0 cm in length is placed at a distance of 20 cm in front of a convex 
mirror of radius of curvature 30 cm. Find the position of the image, its nature 
and size. 
15. An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave mirror of focal 
length 18 cm. At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed, so that 
a sharp focussed image can be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image. 
16. Find the focal length of a lens of power – 2.0 D. What type of lens is this? 
17. A doctor has prescribed a corrective lens of power +1.5 D. Find the focal length of 
the lens. Is the prescribed lens diverging or converging? 
186 
Science 


